frizam and if for some reason you are
unfamiliar with the concept a lot of
beloved children's entertainer explain
it to you in a clip that has in no way
dated badly all of those people who are
in prison right now we're kids once just
like you and then somewhere along the
way they did something wrong something
dumb whatever it was it probably started
small became bigger maybe they even got
away with it at first and thought it'd
never get caught
[Music]
yes they are it's almost like they
should have really seen this coming on
this show we've talked before about the
problems of mass incarceration but this
story isn't so much about who is in
prison or whether they should be there
it's about what they are doing while
they are inside which is to say that
broadly it's a story about prison labor
because over 60% of people in prison
actually have jobs in fact prisons are
basically operated by the inmates as you
would know if you've ever seen an
episode of lockup rawrr on MSNBC the
most common jobs are working in the
kitchen or some form of janitorial duty
I you know clean carpet vacuum empty
trash
I work in laundry here five days a week
Monday through Friday he has recently
landed one of the most coveted inmate
jobs staff canteen clerk I didn't come
in to prison with my staff canteen job I
started a food service in the dish room
and worked my way right on through the
ranks now over didn't start on Oprah
Winfrey Show
I mean here it's right of course Oprah
didn't start on The Oprah Winfrey Show
Oprah started when a glowing magical orb
consolidated all of the Earth's energy
into one mesmerizing perfect beacon of
light then the light the orb and
the result was Oprah that's Oprah's
origin story that's something major
differences between the jobs people do
in prison and the ones they do on the
outside particularly when it comes to
money the average wage in prisons is
around 63 cents per hour and remember
that's the average so that means there
are states where prisoners make
considerably less in Texas Georgia
Arkansas and Alabama prisoners are not
paid for their work at all and in some
places they're required to work under
threat of disciplinary action if they
say no I'm not gonna work they can write
you up for that they can send you to
solitary for that that's that slavery
work for free and then they and they can
put you in solitary if you don't work or
write you up for not working why is that
not slavery yeah that's not good because
why is that not slavery is one of those
questions that even if you have to ask
it something has already gone very wrong
like how many swastika tattoos or which
of mommy's nightstand drawers did you
open things are already bad we just need
to figure out how bad and the answer to
why is this not slavery as well it's not
exactly not slavery because it turns out
treating prisoners as slaves is
literally written into the Constitution
the Thirteenth Amendment states that
slavery is abolished except as a
punishment for a crime and the amendment
abolishing slavery is really not the one
that you want to suddenly include the
word accept and look I know that too
many inmates are not a naturally
sympathetic group of people in fact when
there was a push to get a higher wage
for those working behind bars a few
years ago these people on Fox found it
hilarious inmates behind bars are now
suing for the minimum wage for the work
they're doing behind bars
should that be a crime he says he
deserves minimum wage as if crime pays
why let crime pay exactly crime should
not pay it's very
simple common sense is very simple first
of all if you watch that on mute you
would definitely assume it was a panel
on a reptile dysfunction even with the
sound you can't definitely say it's not
but being away in a way I actually get
it crime doesn't pay
does sound like common sense but it's
much much more complicated than that the
truth is when you combine the low to
non-existent wages that prisoners get
paid with these surprisingly high costs
that they and their families can incur
while they're inside the current system
can wind up costing all of us and
tonight we're going to look into how how
prisoners make and spend money and the
companies that have managed to get rich
off them and let's start with the fact
that prison labor can take many forms it
is often the janitorial or kitchen work
that you saw earlier but in some states
prisoners actually worked as
firefighters in fact in the California
wildfires last year around 12% of the
firefighters were current inmates and I
should say many of them find fighting
fires very rewarding just the other day
we were able to save houses from from
burning down to have a woman come out to
her backyard and thank us for saving her
house makes us feel like we're doing
something now being able to give back
and
potentially save lives is its use yeah
that makes sense
being able to save lives must be very
satisfying it's why Batman always seems
to be in such a good mood and why his
catchphrase is we I'm Batman
how great is fighting crime it's great
I'm moving ship and honestly feels like
the best case scenario for Prison labor
people who are happy to work
contributing to society and learning new
skills although it is worth noting those
firefighters base pay is only between 3
and 5 dollars per day for that dangerous
work and if you thinking well at least
they're learning skills that will help
them get a job on the outside that is
often not the case California law bars
most people with a criminal record from
becoming licensed emergency responders
which means the being a firefighter in
prison is not unlike being an art
history major in college it may be fun
while you're in there but you're not
going to be doing it once you get out -
you hear that personally you're gonna
work in human resources you're gonna
have a favorite coffee mug and a throw
pillow that says it's wine o'clock
somewhere and you're gonna stare up the
window you only for the sweet release of
death just like everybody else is far
from the only dangerous job that
prisoners do at Louisiana State
Penitentiary some take part in a prison
rodeo where the entertainment can be
insane take convict poker for inmates
said nervously at a card table a very
restless bull picks out his target
last one standing we're sitting win so
why do you do this money yeah I'm broke
I'm trying to get a private investigator
all Mikey's here ins two cents an hour
working in the prison field but he can
earn hundreds
Netmark holy that is truly shocking
also and look this really isn't the
biggest issue there but if you are going
to have a game where a bull attacks a
group of people you don't name it
convict poker
you name it dodgeball again not that not
the biggest issue not the biggest issue
but I did want to bring it up and being
attacked by a bull for entertainment is
clearly an outlier most prisoners are
doing routine labor for little to no
money the problem is that can lead to
them being seen less as humans paying
their debt to society and more as a pool
a virtually free labor and don't don't
take that from me listen to Louisiana
sheriff Steve Prater when the state as
part of a prison reform program started
releasing some inmates he went public
with an unusual complaint in addition to
the bad ones and I thought these bad in
addition to them the relation some good
ones that we use every day to to wash
cars to change it all in our cars to
cook in the kitchens to do all this
where we save money well they're gonna
let them out the ones that we use
Network release program they're gonna
let them out just think about what he's
saying he's saying some people need to
stay behind bars because they're too
valuable as a source of free labor which
is exactly the same plan as the villain
in the Shawshank Redemption normally to
qualify as a Stephen King villain you
have to be something way less stupid
like an evil car or a guy who forgot to
wear a coat and look many prisoners do
prefer having jobs to just sitting in
their cells all day which again makes
sense so getting rid of prison labor
entirely is not the answer here paying
prisoners more might help although that
will be very difficult
prisons are now so reliant on their
labor moving to a competitive wage could
cost hundreds of millions of dollars
each year and I know that there are
those out there who might say well what
do prisoners even need money for but the
answer to that question is actually
really important here because what it
may seem like you're living for free in
prison you may actually have a lot of
expenses like legal fees or basic
necessities like soap or shampoo and
lawmakers in Arizona recently discovered
prisons there were actually requiring
women to buy personal hygiene products
there's a new bill in the legislature
that would have this state pay for all
feminine hygiene products and first to
hear the proposal a committee of nine
men some of them a bit squeamish about
taking on the task
I guess hearing the bill was something I
didn't expect I didn't expect to hear
pads and tampons and and the problems of
periods so two things first the problem
of period sounds like the title of a
medical textbook written back in the
time when we used to treat female
emotions with either electrocution or
drowning and second I am frankly shocked
than a man who willingly chose that
haircut isn't more of an expert on women
but but the fact is until last year
Arizona's female prisoners were allotted
just 12 pads per month which as I am
going to say at least half of you know
often isn't nearly enough and extra
hygiene products were not a minor
expense base pay per prisoner starts at
15 cents an hour which meant that to buy
one additional pack of pads took about
21 hours of work and in theory women who
needed more could simply ask prison
guards or get a medical dispensation but
the problem is in Arizona as in many
places prisoners also have to pay a
copay to see a doctor and not let a
former prisoner addressing that panel
tell you how that worked out in reality
the most important thing if I want to
request the medical right to get more
pads because say I have a heavier float
this month and last month I would have
to pay four dollars just to be seen by
medical now when I'm making nine cents
after tax you got to really think if I
want to put my whole month's income into
hopefully being allowed approved for
extra pads if they believe I deserve a
look not only is it utterly ridiculous
that she needs to pay to make a case
that she deserves access to pads just
spare a thought for her having to
discuss the details of a heavy flow into
this bewildered face
so it's pretty clear that for many
prisoners there was an enormous gap
between what they make at their prison
job and having enough for basic
necessities now if they are lucky they
might have family or others on the
outside willing to help them out by
sending them money but even that is more
complicated than it appears and this
brings us to the final absurd element
here the for-profit companies who stand
between prisoners and the outside world
because let's say that you want to send
money to your incarcerated son or
daughter one of the biggest companies
that lets families do that is JP but
there is a catch in lots of states
families have to go through JP to send
money into a prison at all for almost
four hundred fifty thousand families JP
is the only way to send an inmate money
and the company charges them fees as
high as forty five percent but gave to
him $50 I have to I have to send 70 off
of my card it's hard to some people like
Pat Taylor who are barely scraping by I
just let appeal go and let it be I'll go
and pick it up later it's true it costs
her $20 just to send 50 so you know what
that means look out Ticketmaster when it
comes to Dickies transaction fees
there's a new asshole in town to
transfer money isn't the only way
companies can profit Jay pays parent
company secure us is also a leader in
the field of charging prisoners for
phone calls and video visits which is a
1.2 billion dollar a year industry
Sakura says ads which play like a shitty
Apple commercial but make it look like
it's a warm fuzzy company focused on
human connections and it's honestly nice
that they are fully acknowledging how
important it is for people to connect to
others on the phone is frankly a less
than AT&T would do well to take I'm
fuzzy ring well don't rub bucks on me I
won't be circles aware
Oh what that doesn't make clear is just
how expensive they have successfully
made those vital connections phone calls
within states can go over $1 per minute
and facility served by securest have had
fees over $3 for the first minutes and
16 cents for each additional one and
that can really add up which can be a
massive problem for prisoners families
who may have limited resources
Shana palace is married to a man who is
currently facing a 7 and a half year
sentence in prison palace has been
paying high telephone fees trying to
keep her daughter connected to her
father however she can weirdo but at six
dollars a call keeping that connection
isn't easy you know some people might
not see six dollars a day as lot but
when you have an infant you know six
dollars a day is half of you know a pack
of diapers and that is rough you should
not have to choose between letting a kid
talk to her dad and buying them diapers
that is pretty much the definition of a
shitty shitty situation and if you
curtail or remove that connection it can
have serious consequences on life inside
the prison as those who have been there
can tell you all the lot of guys have
when they're incarcerated are those
phone calls those letters those visits
that's it
that's what they live for that's how to
get through their time I seen guys their
family didn't come see him in a week or
two and the next thing you know they
ended up in a hole for 90 days because
they just felt alone because you feel
alone you can't build a family in prison
he's right contact with families is
incredibly important and completely
unrelated in the hole for 90 days is
also House teen describes a quickie and
if you're thinking well hold up maybe
families can just get around phone
charges by visiting their loved ones in
person they can although that is
changing to prisons and especially jails
have been phasing out in-person visits
in favor of video visitation meaning
that you can turn up to see a loved one
and still have to sit in a different
room and talk to them on a screen
incredibly this is something secured us
has contractually mandated up until 2015
some of their contracts with facilities
have been promised to eliminate all
face-to-face visitation and that is just
Eve
machine that makes money by stopping
people from seeing their families
sounds like an item at the top of
Satan's Amazon wishlist right before
super bedbugs cauliflower rice and just
the actual existence of Amazon and while
this sounds inhumane the people running
these facilities will insist that the
reason for it is purely a safety issue
if you limit the people who are coming
in you're going to limit the the
attempts of contraband you don't have to
worry about a contraband if you're doing
a video visit you're not gonna be able
to introduce contraband into the jail
okay I get it so it's a contraband issue
the problem with that explanation is
that research shows that installing
video visitation does not decrease
contraband probably because it's easier
for it to come in through other ways
like through guards staff and
occasionally through hours although
admittedly that is mostly an Azkaban
problem so so why push video visitation
so hard it is difficult to say I will
point out it seems notable that jails
and prisons often get a cut of the
proceeds from phone and video calls and
what they will point out that the money
goes to an inmate welfare fund that fund
is often used for things other than
inmate welfare one County spent nearly
three quarters of that money on staff
salaries while another dipped into it to
buy tasers tasers which really stretches
the definition of inmate welfare to a
literally shocking degree and when you
put all of this together you wind up
with a scenario where you're not just
hurting the people who are incarcerated
you're hurting everyone around them one
in three families of inmates reported
going into debt to pay for phone calls
or visitation which is terrible and that
doesn't really set up a prisoner for
success once they are released
look the current system of low wages and
high cost is clearly no good for anyone
but for the companies who are somehow
managing to massively profit from this
and there are things that we can do here
small and large New York City recently
made phone calls from jails free and
Connecticut will consider similar
legislation next year and if we want to
make bigger changes like paying
prisoners more we could do that although
as I've said it would undeniably be
incredibly expensive and very unpopular
you saw people argue crime doesn't pay
that's just common sense but part of the
way
incarceration persist in this country is
by keeping the true costs of it off the
books and we're currently doing that
through a combination of underpaid labor
from prisoners themselves financially
draining families who done absolutely
nothing wrong
and occasionally managing to monetize
prisoners being launched into the
air with livestock and at that
point I would argue we've come a long
long way from common sense
you